---
layout: post
title: "Drab"
author: "Aiman"
date: 2016-12-13 00:00:00 +0800
tags: [elixir, phoenix]
preview: https://tg.pl/drab/images/drab-logo-200-af82b47be98e14d4e9775e55a28df211.png?vsn=d
---
# Drab
***
## What is drab
Drab is an elixir package intended to give developers utilizing the Phoenix Web Framework, the ability to control the UI on their user's browser live.  
  
By using Drab alongside Phoenix, developers can cut down the time they spend writing Javascript and making Ajax calls to deliver a better overall experience to their users.  
  
Drab tries to push the advantages of server side rendering while also minimizing some of the known downsides. As for myself personally, I'm happy that I don't have to spend most of my time writing Javascript.  
  
All changes done by Drab to the DOM is done so live without the page being rerendered. This is achieved by utilizing websockets together with Phoenix's built in socket related solutions.
## Demo
Since this a programming related post it would'nt be complete without showing some actual code. I've made a repo of my initial attempts at using Drab [here](https://github.com/Hinsei/nojs)    
  
Drab's installation process can be refered at their [github's](https://github.com/grych/drab) repository. They also have a link to an example page showing all the other cool stuff that you can achieve with Drab.  
  
Here I will outline the important aspects of the repo related to my experiments with Drab. The files are:
+ `lib/nojs_web/controllers/page_controller.ex`
+ `lib/nojs_web/templates/page/index.html.drab`
+ `lib/nojs_web/commanders/page_commander.ex`
 
  
### Controller
```elixir
# page_controller
def index(conn, _params) do
  render conn, "index.html", todos: []
end
```
The code snippet above is fairly straight forward, I have a page controller that listens to a request related to an action called index. Index would then tell the server to serve a template called `index.html` here. In the template we have access to our assigned todos variable which contains an empty list. This variable can be called in our template via `<% @todos %>`.
  
### Template
```elixir
# index.html.drab
<h2>My List</h2>
<p id="info_flash" class="alert alert-info"></p>

<form>
  <input name="new_todo">
  <button drab-click="add">Add</button>
</form>

<%= if !Enum.empty?(@todos) do %>
  <%= for todo <- @todos do %>
    <p><%= todo %></p> 
  <% end %>
<% end %>
```
Above is the snippet of our index template. A key thing to take note is that we no longer use `.eex` extensions at the end of our templates, instead now to use drab we have to rename our templates to end with `.drab` extension instead.  
  
Besides that everything is contained above should be self explainatory. The only new thing that we have not encountered is the new attribute, `drab-click`, that we provided to our button. We'll see in the next section how the value, `add`, is utilized by Drab.  
  
### Commander
```elixir
# page_commander
defmodule NojsWeb.PageCommander do
  def add(socket, sender) do
    list = peek(socket, :todos) 
    
    %{"form" => %{"new_todo" => value}} = sender
    
    poke(socket, todos: list ++ [value])
    
    set_prop(socket, "#info_flash" innerHTML: "Added")
    
    Task.start(fn->
      Process.sleep(2000) 
      set_prop(socket, "#info_flash", innerHTML: "")
    end)
  end
end
```
Compared to the last 2 sections, this part of our code has a alot of new stuff going on that most of us might not be familiar with. To better explain the code shown above, I will first give a brief explaination on how some of these new methods function, before trying to describe the whole flow in pseudocode.  
  
##### add/2
  `add/2` is the function called by button in our index template when it is click. Notice how the name of the method and the value of our `drab-click` attribute matches.  It accepts 2 arguments the first being a `map` containing various metadata related to our socket connection and a sender `map` which contains information about the triggered event.
##### peek/2
  `peek/2` is used when we would like to retrive the value of an assigned variable from our template. It accepts the socket `map` as it first argument and an `atom` representing the name of the assigned variable that we would like to look at.
##### poke/2
  `poke/2` is used when we want to change the stored value in our assigned variable from our template. Unlike `peek/2`, `poke/2` expects it's second argument to be new value to be a `keyword` declaring which variable to assign the new value to.
##### Disclaimer
`peek/2` and `poke/2` will only have access to assigned variables that were declared beforehand in the template
##### Pseudocode
```
get current value of todos and store it inside a variable
get input value from sender map
change initial value of todos by adding new input into the list
change the inner HTML value of an element with id `info_flash`
start a task that would wait 2 seconds before hiding shown flash message
```
***
## Conclusion
Hopefully you have a better understanding on the capabilities of Drab. It is a good alternative to Javascript when it comes to front-end development. Not having to write a client side app and a server side app everytime I start a new project is a refreshing change.   
  
  Althought I must state that it is not a replacement for client side rendering frameworks such as React.  
  
If you are still confused on what the actual result would look like, I recommend cloning the repo and playing around with the actual code to get a better understanding on what I have touched on today.  
  
With the introduction of shared commanders, my experiments moving forward would be to actually make a more modular structure in my server side front end rendering. Thank you for reading this post, leave a comment on the repo if you have any questions and stay tuned for further posts!
